# In Pursuit of the Perfect Portfolio: Harry M. Markowitz

**Channel:** MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering   |   **Date:** 2017-05-23   |   **URL:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdeoIPCFtDU

## Description

Please do not quote. To accompany the forthcoming book, In Pursuit of the Perfect Portfolio by Steve Foerster (Ivey Business School at Western University) and Andrew W. Lo (MIT).

Video Production by: Blue Barn Creative (http://www.bluebarncreative.com/)
Animation by: BigTime Video Services (http://www.bigtimevid.com/)

## Transcript

[Music] Hello, I'm Steve Forester. Welcome to our project in pursuit of the perfect portfolio. It's my pleasure and my honor to be here with Dr. Harry Marowitz, 1990 Nobel Prize in Economics winner and the father of modern portfolio theory. Harry, uh, thank you very much for joining me today. Thank you for having me. I want to start off by, uh, taking you back, uh, to the early 1950s and tell me about your first investment decision. When I wrote my article, my 1952 article, uh, I had never invested. I was a student uh, with I don't want to say I'm a poor student. I mean, it was a student without funds. And um uh the first time I had the opportunity to invest was when I had uh u joined the rand corporation in Santa Monica. They offered u uh TIA versus cre stocks versus bonds and at that time the I'm look forward to telling this story. uh people have it wrong uh have it right but uh but they don't have the right conclusion at that time I u thought if the market goes up the stock market goes up and I'm completely out of it then I'll look silly and if it goes down and I'm 100% in it I'll look silly so I went 50/50 so I was at that time minimizing maximum regret now the story is sometimes told and I've seen it even in the Wall Street Journal that uh Harry Markwitz, even Harry Markwitz when he makes his portfolio decisions, he doesn't use mean variance analysis. He doesn't use MPT, just uses minimax regret. Well, that's what I did in 1952. But that's not what I would do today. It's not what I would recommend more precisely, it's not what I would recommend a 25year-old do now. uh now I probably put them um 100% in stocks. Uh a lot has happened since I published that article in 1952. There's an infrastructure. We have this data that goes back to 1926 at at least um that shows you how on the average over the long run if you put a dollar in small caps it would be worth like 13,000 or something like that because it's compounding at 12%. If you put it in large cap, it' be worth three or 5,000 because it's compounding at 10%. But if you put it in government bonds, it'd be worth 150 bucks as compared to 15 13,000. Now we have optimizers. We didn't have an optimizer in 1952 and so on. So the uh uh the conclusion is uh false that u now Harry Markwood's 2017 would recommend to a 25 year that they go 50/50. So I want to come back to that later on in in our discussion in terms of your views on the on the perfect portfolio. So that's a great uh foreshadowing of uh of what your thoughts are. Let's go back to when you were when you were um working on your dissertation at University of of Chicago and and you have this this uh unique ability to see things that that other people don't see. Can you tell us about uh one of the aha moments when you were in the uh University of Chicago library reading uh John Burr Williams uh uh investment book and and what what what were your insights that that came to that was my first that was my first aha moment and I've been seeking aha moments forever ever since I was at the stage where I was where I had to write a dissertation. We'll back up a little bit with with the story. I went to my thesis advisor, Yasha Marshek, u to ask for suggestions. He was busy. So, uh I waited in his auntie room and somebody another guy was out there and the other guy was a a broker waiting for Marshack. So we talked about why we were here and he suggested that I do a dissertation you know in the stock about the stock you know applying mathematical econometric techniques to the stock market. So I went in before he did. I told Marshek the guy out there suggested that I do a dissertation of the stock market and apply to the stock market. Uh and Marshek said well Alfred Kohl's who endowed the Kohl's commission would like that. He was he was actually interested in u application of econometric techniques to the stock market. He was the first to do experiments with whether forecasters could forecast and found out they couldn't and and so on. So um Marshack thought it was a good idea but he didn't have u he didn't know the literature so he sent me to Marshall Ketchum who was then dean professor Ketchum was the dean of the business school I now understand u and he gave me a reading list which included Graham and Don which is still on my shelves of course uh and u weenberger's port investment companies and their portfolios u and we could see how things were diversified and classified by industry. And then John Burr Williams was the financial theorist of the day. And Williams said that the value of a stock should be the present value of its future dividends. Um and and now of course dividends are uncertain. So I figured he meant the the present value of the expected value of future dividends. uh and later in the book he does say that when things are uncertain you should use the mean value the expected value u now my reasoning process went well if you're only interested in the expected value uh or the average mean value of a of a stock you must be only interested in the mean value of a portfolio u and if you're only interested in the mean value of the portfolio the way you maximize that is put all your stock put all your eggs in one basket which I knew that wasn't right so I thought well you're trying to avoid risk as well as seek return. I drew a graph with risk on you know one return on one axis and risk on the other and um I thought of the uh u the returns on securities being like random variables that mean that means that the uh return on the portfolio is a weighted average of the returns on the individual securities where you choose the weights. I knew uh offhand at the time uh what the expected value of a weighted average weighted sum was, but I didn't know what the variance or standard deviation of a weighted sum was. I looked I got a book off the library shelf, Yuspensky's introduction to mathematical probability. Uh my my memory isn't that good, but I remember that that whole scene very well. uh and uh looked up the formula for the variance of a weighted sum and there it was co-variances correlations. So I had the aha moment that um the variability the riskiness of the portfolio depended not only on the volatility of the individual securities but the the extent to which they went up and down together. And um so there's still a lot to do that that that became essentially my 1952 article plus a little geometry of pictures of how efficient sets look and there's still more to do like figuring out how to compute these things and estimate but that was the aha moment. So these these ideas that seem so simple now but but yet you saw something that that no one else I don't know why Williams um says that u uh if you diversify sufficiently you will get the mean but that is only true if uh risks are independent uncorrelated u if risks are correlated you don't get the mean you get there's a rule that says the The variance of your portfolio, this is from chapter five of my 1959 book, the variance of the portfolio doesn't approach zero. It it approaches the average co-variance. So if all the correlations are zero, then the average coariance is zero. Variance will approach zero. But in general, it won't. And uh how somebody could live through the 1990 1929 to 1932 crash and assume uncorrelated is you know difficult to see in retrospect. I think his book came out in 1938 so he should have yeah he he had gone through yeah he had gone through uh he had seen the uh 2932 was fresh in his memory. Yeah. See the the notion of diversification goes way back. Uh, the Bible has some referred to. Um, the merchant of Venice. Uh, uh, Antonio, why are you sad? Is your business going bad? My my goods are not to one bottom trusted to but not and not not my fortune to this year. So my, you know, so he knew about diversification. What what was lacking was a good theory that would uh catch up with intuition and and and you brought that theory and and here we are now in in March of 2017, right? And now this is the almost to the 25th 25th annthary 25th is gone. 65th anniversary of how time flies paper. So I want to talk about that because this is the the journal of finance uh paper called portfolio selection. Um and and what's so striking about it is is how different it was compared to other uh papers that appeared in that same issue that looked at uh inflation and public policy issues and income statements. Uh what is it that that made your paper stand out and and made it so different at the time and yet it wouldn't be that different from other journal finance articles uh today? Well, my emphasis was on portfolio selection, you know, considering the portfolio as a whole. uh they were all talking about evaluating securities or industries and the notion that you should u have some kind of a theory about what makes a well- diversified portfolio and what is the trade-off between risk and return that some it's surprising that the human race went so long uh to to leave me to discover that to you know to fill that need and and really providing a process that that helped to create a whole investment management portfolio management industry. Let me tell you a little story. um you know Peter Bernstein of course who's his book on u uh there's a book capital ideas capital ideas and um u something of against the gods a strange history of risk that's the history of risk he uh he was at a meeting uh that I was at to the robot has an annual meeting and I'm with one of his uh his adviserss and Peter Bernstein Peter was there then he's no longer with us. Um and after in his comment about uh to on somebody else's uh paper, he just as a remark from the audience, not as part of his paper, he said u uh his comment on the somebody else's paper. Uh you younger people don't know what institutional investing was like before the 1950s. We would sit around and have discussions like you see on television about I think this industry or I think this some company and somehow we would clo clobber together cobble together a uh uh a portfolio. uh and and he said now you have a process and it was at that minute you know moment when he said now you have a process that I realized what I started of course there's a lot that goes into it besides you know like data and programs and so on so forth that's that's must have been an amazing moment for you to to realize always now um 1952 was a great year for you um you have the journal of finance uh paper but but a lot of people don't realize realized that that there was uh another paper that you refer to as Marwitz 1952b right uh that appeared in the journal of political economy uh the utility of wealth and and it's through that paper that you've now been often referred to as uh as not only the father of modern portfolio theory but the grandfather of uh of uh uh behavioral finance behavioral e economics. Can you tell us about that paper and and the key insights? Now, first confirming that uh you know certifying that I'm the grandfather of behavioral finance, Danny Conorman has a book out called Thinking Fast and Thinking Slow. And of course, if you're Harry Marowitz and you get a copy of Thinking Fast and Thinking Slow, uh you get you first thing you look to, you know, in the index to see if if I'm referred to. Uh there's two references to me. One was sort of inconsequential. The other was um told us the history of how prospect theory came about and uh the conne says that there that he and Tverki were struggling with some some experimental results which they just couldn't understand. And finally, Tverki came and said, "Now I got the answer. It's in a then 25-year-old paper by Harry Marowitz. Uh it said that if you want to explain actual behavior, do not attach utility to uh to wealth, attach it to change in wealth." And that you know then that plus what and then there was a certain stripe of the curve depending on my curve had a u um had a a concave uh portion u uh on the left on the in losses. So that's was explaining why there's ins insurance why people uh insure and then there was a convex portion which explained why which is part of the explanation why people buy bought lottery and then I was again a concave because otherwise you have the St. Petersburg Paradise. Now that how did that all came about come about? U um I was teach taking Milton Friedman's class in microeconomics. uh he I don't remember whether it was a an assignment an optional assignment or a mandatory assignment but uh he assigned a paper by uh Freriedman and Savage uh I can't remember the name of the paper but it was uh trying to explain why there was both gambling and insurance and it had a curve which is very much like the the Marowitz curve the later Marowitz curve in which there was a concave portion, a convex portion, a concave portion. So I looked at this and I thought, well, you know, if you took a it looked like a a a two humped camel walking uphill. So if you take a plank and, you know, put it against these two humps, you get a double tangent. And the behavior of people depend on where they are with respect to the these two tangencies. Like for example, if you'd have two middle class people who are halfway between the lower tangency and the upper tangency, there's no fair bet that they would prefer than one where they flip a coin and one becomes poor and one becomes rich. And you don't see that in fact. And then um the people who are uh below the lower tangent, the poor people, they don't buy lottery tickets. and then I don't know who's lining up in front of me when I'm trying to buy a Wall Street Journal on Third Avenue in New York. Um, and so on. I mean, it just didn't make any sense. And the only point that made any sense was that the inflection point where they where they'd be uh you were cautious on the downside and maybe uh a little bit, you know, willing to gamble a little on the upside. And then I said I didn't call that that's usually current wealth but I I said I call that customary wealth because if you have a recent windfall gain you move into the uh convex part you're you're a little bit more devil may care. You're playing with house money so to speak and if you have a a recent windfall loss you become more cautious. So um uh so the only point that made any sense was this inflection point u and as compared to your your say tverki says comment diversity speak of his current wealth but I I talked about his customary wealth because uh you're usually there but if you had a wind a recent windfall gain or loss so that was that was another aha moment. You you've had many of them. I love them. I just I adore them. That's my So, you you followed up your your your 1952 uh portfolio selection paper seven years later with with a book by the same name and it packed a lot of things into it. Um there was a chapter on matrix algebra that I think many famous people including Bill Sharp learned. He said he tell I don't know who else but he says he learned it. Absolutely. So, so what uh what had changed and and what was in there in terms of some of the nuggets that eventually became the the capital asset pricing model that Bill Sharp under your toutelage was able to uh follow up on? Well, uh there's no let's uh dispel the notion that Bill Sharp got the idea for the capital asset pricing model from me. Um, let me tell you the, you know, long as we're down that path, let me tell the relationship between me, me and Mill. Um, we think roughly 1960 as fast as far as Bill and I can reconstructed. I I was working at the Rand Corporation. He was working at the Rand Corporation. He u I was working on the Simscript programming language or something else besides uh uh portfolio theory. And uh he he appeared at my door said, "My name is Bill Sharp. I'm a student. I'm a I work here like you do and I'm a student trying to get a PhD at UCLA UCLA right Fred Weston who was the publisher who is the editor of the Journal of Finance uh at that time uh had told Bill oh why don't you ask Harry for a suggestion you like his 1952 article why don't you ask him for a suggestion u and in chapter five of Mark with 1952 2 1959 I talk about u what I call derived covariances the fact that there are just too many co-variances to expect or correlations to expect anybody to individ any team to individually look at them and estimate them so you need something like a factor model um and I point you I pointed to him out the the idea that there's too many coariances and why don't you try building a factor model and see how well it works So that became a sharp 1963 a uh a simplified model of portfolio theory which showed how if you're estimating fac you know factors for each security rather than covariances you know if you have you know 100 securities you got 100 times 100 divided by two roughly coariances that's 50,000 whatever it is u so whereas you'd have a 100 betas to estimate so not only is your estimation process easier. But he published uh ways of quickly uh tracing out efficient frontiers. And in those days, computing computing wasn't like it is the today. You know, you the the biggest computers in those days weren't as powerful as your cell phone, you know. Uh anyway, so u uh so he published Sharp's 1963 article was on factor models. His 1964 model was on capital asset pricing model. Now I've published on CAPM but it's like I have a um an article uh called market efficiency a theor a theoretical distinction and so what and u the uh came out of the FHA I don't know decade ago or so plus or minus uh the uh and and it said the theoretical distinction was between the proposition The market is efficient in the sense that it has correct probabilistic information. Everybody has the same beliefs and they're correct. Um and everybody has a mean variance efficient portfolio. You have to distinguish between that efficiency in that sense. Everybody's processing information correctly and the statement the market portfolio is a mean variance efficient portfolio. um in what I show in that paper that uh FHA paper on uh theoretical distinction and so what is not only do you have to distinguish those concepts but the uh in order to deduce that the market portfolio is an mean variance efficient portfolio and there's this linear relationship between expected returns and and uh ba beta you have to assume either either like Sharp and Lintler that you can borrow all you want at the risk-free rate or you have to assume like Roy did that you can short and use the proceeds so you can give your uh your broker $1,000 short a million dollars worth of stock one and go long a million and $1,000 worth of stock two and that's a feasible solution you know I don't think we'll get away with that I don't think well try try it at your broker if you do tell me what your name broker's name is so there's a reggg t and those have that that that has constraints so u and it's also true that there is not a linear relationship between expected returns and and beta defined thus defined so these folks who find that there's not a linear relationship and then have all these fantastic explanations of why it there isn't a linear relationship my my my explanation is very simple it's uh there I don't know about you, but I can't borrow all I want at the risk rate. That said, I should add that I still think u capo is very important because it is a null hypothesis against which you can test you know empirical results you could a lot of people do and it's just their interpret you know when they find there isn't a linear relationship and they have all these fantastic explanations that u my I say as I say uh I think capm was very important historic torically and still is as a as the null hypothesis against which all things get measured. Let let me come back to something we talked about earlier. Let's sort of let's sort of uh circle circle back. Um the perfect portfolio. Okay. Um what do you see as as uh as the perfect portfolio for individuals for institutional investors? um is there a perfect perfect portfolio and and uh what might be coming out of your work that that would suggest uh one type of portfolio versus another okay to sort of tie it into the first place since I don't believe that uh you know because people can't borrow all they want at the risk-free rate uh I don't believe that the market you know the market portfolio plus or minus leverage uh is even efficient so it's certainly not perfect Um the difference between a major difference between Marquis 1952 and Marquis 1959 is Mark was 52 proposed mean variance efficiency and it analyzed it subject to one particular constraint set the sum of the x's equal one and the x's are non- negative um by 1959 uh I had come to realize that you might want lots other constraints on the choice of your portfolio. You might want upper bounds on individual securities. You might want upper bounds on uh on on how much you have in certain u in industry or you know sets of securities. You might have other linear constraints like you want to have income at a certain level as compared to and so on. So what I uh uh provided um in uh Markwitz's 1959 was a computer program that u uh found mean variance efficient portfolios subject to any linear uh equality or inequality constraints. uh they're linear constraints like uh the sum of the x's equal one or inequality like uh this plus this has got to be less than or equal to that and the these are used in in practice uh like I have a client who does portfolios of closed end funds buying them when they're a deeper discount and selling them when they're less deep discount but it uh he has a uh uh world index and all country world index uh benchmark mark and so he constrains the portfolio not to deviate too much in any one uh country and not to deviate too much from the benchmark in any one region and he doesn't want the turnover constraint to be turnover to be too too great and so he has a turnover constraint and so on. So um uh talking about the individual um well individuals differ some are uh some they differ in their tax situation. So it should be an after tax mean variance analysis and that gets a little tricky uh because there are things with different time horizons. You put it into the 401k plan, you can't get it back out without penalty until you're something you know 59 and a half or whatever. Okay. So u uh the uh the correct port maybe not the perfect portfolio but the correct portfolio for the individual depend on uh uh the risk preferences. You know they're willing to trade off uh uh you know trade off risk for return. Uh you you don't want them dropping out of the program prematurely. So if you if uh if it looks like the right thing for for the long run is to have 50% in small cap and you know small cap is very volatile or maybe it's 50% in the emerging market which is very volatile and if it has a bad bounce right out of the off the box you'll decide that's a stupid asset class. It's a stupid manager if you go out of the program. So there are constraints on the choice of portfolio which varies from individual to individual. some individual they have shorter or longer horizons they u they u are willing to tolerate they're they're willing to invest in certain asset classes or not they have different tax situations and so on so uh there is no perfect portfolio there is a right you know we will assume that there is a right portfolio for them and part of the process is to involve the right from the day one part of the process is always to uh involve the user, the investor, what is their trade-off between risk and return. Um in the old days, you just showed them a a frontier and you said pick. Uh now you do Monte Carlo simulation to show them whether some a few points from the probability distribution of how much they can spend when they retire and so on so forth. So there is no perfect portfolio. There's just the right portfolio for an a specific individual. has a lot of work to find it. So again, it's it's the process that you provided. It's certainly going to be diversification is going to be an important element to that, but not necessarily the market portfolio. Oh, typically not. In fact, you've run frontiers, you know, they start out with an a fairly undiversified portfolio and they pick up securities and they lose securities and people are different. You on different, you know, different people are at different points on the frontier. And nobody's holding the market portfolio because the market portfolio probably isn't even an efficient portfolio and it's certainly not an efficient portfolio for everybody and we can't borrow and lend at the risk-free rate. So it it would be if you could borrow and lend if you could borrow all you want at the risk-free rate then the only mean variance efficient portfolios would be the market plus or minus leveraging but it's not true. So where do you think the investment management industry is is going to go in the next 65 years? Right now we've got robo advisers which in some sense is is going back to uh the beginnings and and looking at things in a in a systematic way. Where where do you think the industry is going? Well, I might mention that uh I have a number of clients. I I work on retainers and I you know so somebody's paying me even now that I'm goofing off talking. Uh and a couple of my uh uh clients are robo advisors with different one is acorns where they they take small chain you know they round up the u they round up the the bill and your te your credit card bill and invest it and say and so so uh yeah I'm all for robo advisors. um they have to uh then uh make some guess as to where you want to be on the frontier or or maybe just the fact that you chose them uh this particular advisor uh robo advisor shows what kind of portfolio you must be interested in. Um the um I think uh we are now doing a uh very good job, increasingly good job of exploiting my 1952 idea. Uh and now let me tell you the idea that's in volume two of the four volume book I'm currently writing called Anxiously Waiting. Yeah. Yeah. I got to plug the book. uh it's called risk return analysis and the subtitle is the theory and practice of rational investing and actually it's not about rational investing it's a rational decisionmaking financial planning and so on so so and uh volume two talks about decision support systems so a 401k advisory service or robot ser is a decision support you u u uh with the the better one I mean the more flex flexible ones. You get to interact with the system and pick what risk class you want to be in and what savings rate you'll need to have and so on. So you so it it helps you uh it helps you make the decision. Then it takes your decision and implements it. So it's a decision support not a decision maker. It's a decision support system. Now the investment decision I think I view I mean the way I view it is part of a game which the family is playing it and these are these are financial this is the financial planning game but it has to do with many things like births and deaths and weddings and people getting sick and having insurance all life life events it is the events and decisions which have major impact on the supply and demand of financial resources and the uh just analyzing the uh portfolio selection decision in isolation is like trying to decide how how a bishops should move in a chess game without considering the chess game as a whole. So I think u the way I see the thing going in the next 60 years and it's the way I'm trying to push it in volume two u is for the uh the the man machine the human computer division of labor to u cover more fully the various aspects of financial planning. Well, I we we wait anxiously for volumes three and four and and on behalf of uh all investors, uh I want to thank you for what you've contributed u to to help help us make better decisions, more rational decisions and uh I really appreciate you taking the time. It's been my pleasure both both to work at this field for the last what 65 years we've decided. uh and and your interview was very uh was very pleasant. Thank you very much. Thank you.